DJ September 2023 (#185)
xaur/decred-news: journal/202309.md

- Changed [`sampleconfig`](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/pull/3185) package to use Go's embed functionality. It allows to have sample configs as separate files that are easier to work with, while retaining convenient access to their contents from code.
- Added functions to access the [R and S values](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/pull/3188) of signatures in the `secp256k1/ecdsa` package, these values can be useful in some computations.
- Added a couple of [new](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/pull/3190) [tests](https://github.com/decred/dcrd/pull/3191) to push test coverage to 99.6%.
- Minor changes { _drop after review: 3186, 3189_ }

### dcrwallet

_[dcrwallet](https://github.com/decred/dcrwallet) is a wallet server used by command-line and graphical wallet apps._

Changes backported to the v1.8.1 release:

- Updated verbose [`getblock` and `getblockhash`](https://github.com/decred/dcrwallet/pull/2285) responses to include the new proof of work hash.

Changes merged in `master` towards future releases:

- Updated [VSP fee calculation](https://github.com/decred/dcrwallet/pull/2281) for the new block reward split in DCP-12 (proof of stake reward increased from 80% to 89%).

>   - { _if this is not backported v1.8.1, will VSPs accept unupdated fees?_ }

Reviewer: The updated piece of code is only used by vspd itself, not by vspd clients (ie ticket buyers), so theres no need for it to be backported.

Author: Updated.

- Unexported some code and [moved](https://github.com/decred/vspd/pull/428) it to [internal](https://github.com/decred/vspd/pull/430) [packages](https://github.com/decred/vspd/pull/436) since it is not suitable for consuming by third parties. Smaller public API surface makes development and maintenance easier.
- Reworked how components are [created, started](https://github.com/decred/vspd/pull/434), and [stopped](https://github.com/decred/vspd/pull/436) to decouple and simplify code.
- Fixed [database backup](https://github.com/decred/vspd/pull/439) running only once instead of running periodically (unreleased bug).
- ~20 commits with smaller improvements and code cleanup.
  - { _drop after review: 423 (spent scan fix), 433 (move), 429 (import kill), 432 (unparam), 431 (minor opti), 437 (rename), 441 (unused), 444 (x4 decomp, renames), 449 (deps), 446 (x8 minor cleanups and tweaks), 450 (ver)_ }

{ _image candidates:_

- new counters + banner
  - https://github.com/decred/vspd/pull/417
- missed page
  - https://github.com/decred/vspd/pull/451

}

### gominer

_[gominer](https://github.com/decred/gominer) { intro }_

> The switch to BLAKE3 mining has triggered a refresh of the gominer codebase after almost 3 years of little development activity. The main goal was to quickly react to the first GPU miners who did not share their code publicly and began to dominate the hashrate, and allow anyone mine with their GPUs. Besides adding BLAKE3 GPU mining support, effort has been made to automate or document the setup process to address multiple pain points reported by the miners.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The switch to BLAKE3 mining has triggered a refresh of the gominer codebase after almost 3 years of little development activity. The main goal was to quickly react to the first GPU miners who did not share their code publicly and began to dominate the hashrate, and allow anyone to mine with their GPUs. Besides adding BLAKE3 GPU mining support, effort has been made to automate or document the setup process to address multiple pain points reported by the miners.
```

Author: Applied manually.

BLAKE3 GPU mining:

- Added support for [BLAKE3 GPU mining via OpenCL](https://github.com/decred/gominer/pull/194). It includes a custom optimized BLAKE3 OpenCL kernel based on midstates for supporting GPUs that work with OpenCL and OpenCL with ADL. "Kernel" is a program written in a specialized [OpenCL kernel language](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenCL#OpenCL_kernel_language) that runs on the GPU. This change also improves discovery of CL devices, randomizes nonces to ensure each device is doing different work, and improves displaying of hashrate values.

>   - { _was #194 prepared in advance? It came super fast after GPUs showed up!_ }

Reviewer 2: Not really.  More like in parallel.  See my response to the next question.

>   - { _when first private GPU miners were spotted?_ }

Reviewer 2: I spotted behavior that made me suspect them about 4 days prior to the PR (so Saturday, 2nd of September), but it wasn't definitive because they seemed to be intentionally keeping it in the range of plausible deniability.  It wasn't until the night before the PR (so Tuesday, 5th of September) that I actually confirmed it definitively.

I started working on support not long before I originally spotted the aforementioned behavior because I highly suspected it wouldn't be long before somebody did it given a single GPU completely blows CPUs out, much less a farm of them and, sure enough, it wasn't.  I banged it out super fast by working non-stop.

Author: Thanks for these details. The timing was surprising to me because I didnt expect you can switch from "casual" consensus/cryptography/wallet/client-server/etc. development to GPU programming and bang it out so quickly. This is incredible.

Reviewer 2: Well, in fairness, I've worked on various custom hardware and embedded systems with proprietary instruction sets and the like in the past, so it really wasn't much of a leap to GPUs.  Moreover, it primarily involved implementing cryptographic hashing, which of course I've already done for multiple algorithms in the past in non-GPU domains.

In any case, it was **much** easier work than consensus development, by several orders of magnitude.

- Added support for [BLAKE3 GPU mining with CUDA](https://github.com/decred/gominer/pull/195) on Linux. CUDA is a platform for high performance computing on GPUs. The OpenCL kernel has been adjusted to compile with the CUDA toolkit. Unlike OpenCL, [CUDA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CUDA) is proprietary, closed source, and only works on Nvidia cards. 

>   - { _who would use CUDA if OpenCL is faster?_ }

Reviewer 2: CUDA allows extra functionality such as controlling overclocks and fan speeds to potentially significantly reduce power usage in exchange for very little difference hash rate.  Given the cost of electricity is a huge factor in profitability, such tradeoffs often makes sense.

Author: Added a slightly compressed version.

- Added a script and instructions for building the CUDA-enabled version of gominer on [Windows](https://github.com/decred/gominer/pull/206). Building a Go program with CUDA support is [more complicated](https://github.com/decred/gominer/blob/7e2fb9e40e5568d4c85636c7c7ef1474eb44cf6c/cuda_builder.go#L5) on Windows than on Linux, but the new builder goes to great lengths to automate as much as possible. If a missing dependency or environment configuration is detected, the builder will print human-readable directions how to resolve the issue. [Manual instructions](https://github.com/decred/gominer/blob/7e2fb9e40e5568d4c85636c7c7ef1474eb44cf6c/docs/cuda-manual-windows-build.md) have been added as a fallback in case the automatic builder does not work. This change also removes a dependency on GNU Make.

> - Added support for [CUDA versions older than 10](https://github.com/decred/gominer/pull/216). This allows to build gominer on more configurations, although performance will be significantly degraded with older CUDA. Installed CUDA toolkit version and GPU architecture will be [detected automatically](https://github.com/decred/gominer/pull/n/commits/a7076d78a46f9b9d9277fb3f92620ed130d5e7e9) during build to use the best possible GPU features, specifically the fast [funnel shift](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/12767113/funnel-shift-what-is-it) intrinsic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added support for [CUDA versions older than 10](https://github.com/decred/gominer/pull/216). This enables building gominer on more configurations, although performance will be significantly degraded with older CUDA versions. Installed CUDA toolkit version and GPU architecture will be [detected automatically](https://github.com/decred/gominer/pull/n/commits/a7076d78a46f9b9d9277fb3f92620ed130d5e7e9) during build to use the best possible GPU features, specifically the fast [funnel shift](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/12767113/funnel-shift-what-is-it) intrinsic.
```

Author: Applied manually.

- Added [user-reported hashrates](https://github.com/decred/gominer/pull/201).

Other changes:

- Improved [shutdown handling](https://github.com/decred/gominer/pull/207).
- 14 [housekeeping](https://github.com/decred/gominer/pull/210) and clean up commits including the addition of more linters to prevent poor code from getting in.
- Fixed a [couple](https://github.com/decred/gominer/pull/204) of [issues](https://github.com/decred/gominer/pull/205) with the [Stratum](https://braiins.com/stratum-v1) protocol.

{ _omitting minor changes: 202, 209, 211, 213, 215_ }

### dcrpool

_[dcrpool](https://github.com/decred/dcrpool) is server software for running a mining pool._

Similar to gominer, dcrpool development has been reactivated after a period of low activity since summer 2021 when release v1.2.0 came out. The developers upgraded the codebase to latest Go features, fixed multiple concurrency and shutdown edge cases, and paid some technical debt, all in preparation of adding pooled GPU mining support.

Upgrades and changes:

- Added [BLAKE3 support](https://github.com/decred/dcrpool/pull/341) to the internal CPU miner which is used for testing.

>   - { _it is for testing right?_ }

Reviewer 2: Yes.  It's not production ready at all as, among other things, it only uses a single core with no option to use more.

Author: Thanks, updated.
